Maven at its simplest is just a build tool.
If you've used tools like Ant before or just written custom batch files,
it's a tool to build source code and produce an artifact
or produce and have an output of it.
Maven always produces one output that is called an artifact.
You can think of it as a component or a jar,
even a .zip file, and Maven will help us manage our dependencies.
And, as mentioned earlier,
that dependency management is probably the number one reason that
people get into using Maven as managing all the different
dependencies you need is inside an application.
If you are using a tool like Hibernate,
there is one Hibernate jar that you need to import,
but it has 13 or more transitive dependencies.
In other words, other libraries that it needs,
like Commons IO, Commons Lang,
those types of dependencies to be able to use that inside your application.
With Maven,
you can tell it that you want to use this, and it will go and
download all of the transitive dependencies.
We'll go into detail a little bit more in a later module on dependencies
and transitive dependencies and their management. At a macro level, Maven
can be used as a project management tool in the sense that it handles the
management or versioning of your code.
Maven has a version number associated with each
component, and as I mentioned earlier,
we only produce one version of an artifact.
So we can use Maven to tell it that if it is version 1.0 or version 2.0,
those types of clarifications on the artifact that we produce.
It will also help us describe things like what our source control module is,
or where our documentation is stored, who the developers are.
It has some made information also tied to what your project is.
The other nice benefit of using Maven for builds is that,
as mentioned earlier, it can produce extra information.
You can produce the Javadocs,
the source code, and jar file with all of the extra
information your IDE will use. Who owns Maven? It's actually
managed by the Apache Software Foundation.
You can go to maven.apache.org to download it,
and an interesting side note is that Maven sites are actually built with
Maven. Maven's also open source, and it's freely available.
You can get it there and download and change the source if you want.
If you go to a Maven web page, all the layout is done
with their site generation plugin.
That's one of those extra benefits that you can easily produce.
Like we mentioned earlier with Javadocs,
you can generate a website for your code base and structure.
Why do we want to use Maven?
There's a lot of reasons. Repeatable builds, so if you start talking
about source control management or configuration management, or the newer
term of DevOps or SysOps. It's the ability for us to be able to recreate
our build for any environment, as well as to not have to change our
settings for each environment.
So Maven lets us externalize a lot of our settings to
where we can now develop on Windows,
test on Linux box, and deploy to a different flavor
of Linux or Unix in production.
We can also utilize tools like Docker to help us do this inside of our
application. We have all of our properties externalized to where our
code isn't dependent on the environment that it's being built in.
Another really nice feature of Maven, and I alluded to this earlier, is
transitive dependencies.
Downloading a dependency will also pull other items it needs in.
This is the number one reason without a doubt that people start using Maven.
A third benefit is that it contains everything you need for your environment.
So whether I'm building in my IDE, building from the command line,
it contains all the information I need to build our code and reproduce our code.
This fourth bullet point might confuse you a little bit.
It works with a local repo.
Historically,
you've always downloaded all of your jars or other resources
and kept them right inside your project,
which would result into if I had 20 projects, I could possibly
have the same jar downloaded at least 20 times.
It needs that for each one of those environments.
Well, Maven works from a local repo,
just a local structure that enables me to download it once and then just
reference it from there and use it from that location.
It saves on disk space and saves on overhead. Not a huge
deal at first, but when you start doing a lot of builds, it
actually adds up really quick.
Another benefit is that it works very well with your IDE.
It doesn't matter if your IDE is NetBeans, IntelliJ, or Eclipse, we're going
to focus on Eclipse and Spring STS in this training, but it works well with
your IDE, and you can also use it standalone.
What I mean by that is that I can build from the command line,
and the same functions that I call from the command
line are also being called by my IDE.
It doesn't have a different path for the different environment.
You've set up your job environment variables,
and it's all derived from your Maven files.
One last item is that it is the preferred choice for working with build
tools like Jenkins or CruiseControl, Hudson, Bamboo, any of the various
automated build tools that are out there for doing continuous integration.
Maven is, without a doubt, the first class resident that they want you to
use for that type of stuff.
It works with all of those tools,
and there is also a lot of additional plugins that you can use that are also integrated with those continuous integration tools.